


Secure Shell Working Group                                  J. Galbraith
Internet-Draft                                          VanDyke Software
Expires: September 17, 2003                                   P. Remaker
                                                      Cisco Systems, Inc
                                                          March 19, 2003


                    Session Channel Break Extension
                     draft-ietf-secsh-break-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 17, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The Break Extension provides a way to send a break signal during a
   SSH terminal session.












Galbraith & Remaker    Expires September 17, 2003               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Session Channel Break Extension           March 2003


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2. The Break Request  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
      Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
      Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . 6












































Galbraith & Remaker    Expires September 17, 2003               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Session Channel Break Extension           March 2003


1. Introduction

   The SSH session channel provides a mechanism for the client-user to
   interactively enter commands and receive output from a remote host
   while taking advantage of the SSH transport's privacy and integrity
   features.

   A common application of the telnet protocol is the "Console Server"
   whereby a telnet NVT can be connected to a physical RS-232/V.24
   asynchronous port, allowing the telnet NVT to appear as a locally
   attached terminal to that port, and allowing that port to appear as a
   network addressable device.  A number of major computer equipment
   vendors provide high level administrative functions through an
   asynchronous serial port and generally expect the attached terminal
   to be capable of send a BREAK signal, which is defined as the TxD
   signal being held in a SPACE state for a time greater than a whole
   character time, typically interpreted as 250 to 500 ms.

   The telnet protocolprovides a means to send a "BREAK" signal, which
   is defined as a "a signal outside the USASCII set which is currently
   given local meaning within many systems." [1]  Console Server vendors
   interpret the TELNET break signal as a physical break signal, which
   can then allow access to the full range of administartive functions
   available on an asynchronous serial console port.

   The lack of a similar facility in the SSH session channel has forced
   users to continue the use of telnet for the "Console Server"
   function.























Galbraith & Remaker    Expires September 17, 2003               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Session Channel Break Extension           March 2003


2. The Break Request

   The following following channel specific request can be sent to
   request that the remote host perform a break operation.

           byte               SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_REQUEST
           uint32             recipient channel
           string             "break"
           boolean            want_reply
           uint32             break-length in milliseconds

   If the break length cannot be controlled by the application receiving
   this request, the break length parameter SHOULD be ignored and the
   default break signal length of the chipset or underlying chipset
   driver SHOULD be sent.

   If the application can control the break-length, the following
   suggestions are made reagarding break duration. If a break duration
   request of greater than 3000ms is received, it SHOULD be processed as
   a 3000ms break, in order to an unreasonably long break request
   causing the port to become unavailable for as long as 47 days while
   executing the break.  Applications that require a longer break may
   choose to ignore this requirement.  If  break duration request of
   less than 500ms, is requested a break of 500ms SHOULD be sent since
   most devices will recognize a break of that length.  In the event
   that an application needs a shorter break, this can be ignored.  If
   the break-length parameter is 0, the break SHOULD be sent as 500ms or
   the default break signal length of the chipset or underlying chipset
   driver .

   If the want_reply boolean is set, the server MUST reply using
   SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_SUCCESS or SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_FAILURE [4] messages.  If
   a break of any kind was preformed, SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_SUCCESS MUST be
   sent.  If no break was preformed, SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_FAILURE MUST be
   sent.

   This operation SHOULD be support by most general purpose SSH clients.














Galbraith & Remaker    Expires September 17, 2003               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Session Channel Break Extension           March 2003


References

   [1]  Postel, J. and J. Reynolds, "Telnet Protocol Specification", STD
        8, RFC 854, May 1983.

   [2]  Rinne, T., Ylonen, T., Kivinen, T. and S. Lehtinen, "SSH
        Protocol Architecture", draft-ietf-secsh-architecture-13 (work
        in progress), September 2002.

   [3]  Rinne, T., Ylonen, T., Kivinen, T., Saarinen, M. and S.
        Lehtinen, "SSH Transport Layer Protocol",
        draft-ietf-secsh-transport-15 (work in progress), September
        2002.

   [4]  Rinne, T., Ylonen, T., Kivinen, T. and S. Lehtinen, "SSH
        Connection Protocol", draft-ietf-secsh-connect-16 (work in
        progress), September 2002.


Authors' Addresses

   Joseph Galbraith
   VanDyke Software
   4848 Tramway Ridge Blvd
   Suite 101
   Albuquerque, NM  87111
   US

   Phone: +1 505 332 5700
   EMail: galb-list@vandyke.com


   Phillip Remaker
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95120
   US

   EMail: remaker@cisco.com












Galbraith & Remaker    Expires September 17, 2003               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Session Channel Break Extension           March 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Galbraith & Remaker    Expires September 17, 2003               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Session Channel Break Extension           March 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Galbraith & Remaker    Expires September 17, 2003               [Page 7]


